Get started tutorial 2 (#1161)
astronomer/docs: tutorials/get-started-with-airflow-part-2.md

- A GitHub account with a personal access token.

:::note

If you do not have a GitHub account you can create one for free following the steps on the [GitHub website](https://github.com/signup) . You can learn how to create a personal access token in the [official GitHub documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/creating-a-personal-access-token).

:::

## Step 1: Start your Astro project

Navigate to the folder of your Astro project from the Get started with Apache Airflow tutorial. 

1. Run the following Astro CLI command to start Airflow:

```bash
astro dev start
```

Once your local environment is ready, the CLI automatically opens a new tab or window in your default web browser to the Airflow UI at `https://localhost:8080`.

2. Log into the Airflow UI with `admin` for both your username and password.

## Step 2: Create your DAG file

1. Create a new Python file in the `/dags` folder of your Astro project called `my_second_dag.py`.
2. Copy the Getting started with Apache Airflow Part 2 example DAG from the Astronomer Registry.
3. Paste the code into `my_second_dag.py`.

> ## Step 3: Add a provider package

Reviewer: I think it's worth adding a brief sentence or two here stating what provider packages are and why they need to be installed separately. Either before Step 1, or in the text at the end of Step 1. Something like "Provider packages are Python packages maintained separately from core Airflow that contain the hooks and operators to interact with external services."

1. Go back to the Airflow UI. Most likely you will see a DAG Import Error like the one shown below.

![Import Error](/img/tutorials/T2_ImportError.png)

This happens because the DAG uses two Airflow providers the [HTTP provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/http) and the [GitHub provider](https://registry.astronomer.io/providers/github). While the HTTP provider is pre-installed in the Astro Runtime image, the GitHub provider is not, which causes the DAG Import Error.

2. Go to the [Astronomer Registry](https://registry.astronomer.io/) and enter “GitHub” in the search. Click on the card in the drop down menu to open the page of the GitHub provider.

![GitHub Provider](/img/tutorials/T2_GitHubProvider.png)

3. Copy the provider name and version (`apache-airflow-providers-github=2.1.0`) from the **Quick Install** statement. 
4. Paste the provider name and version into the `requirements.txt` file of your Astro project.

![Requirements File](/img/tutorials/T2_RequirementsFile.png)

5. Restart your Airflow instance using the command `astro dev restart`. 

## Step 4: Add an Airflow variable

> After restarting you will get a new DAG Import Error alerting you to a missing Airflow variable. Airflow variables are key value pairs you can set from within the Airflow UI that can be accessed in all DAGs of your Airflow instance.

Author: Hmm 🤔 not sure. I capitalized it to match the UI, but maybe it would make sense using ` or " around it?

## Step 7: View your DAG code

In this step we will go through the DAG code you copied from the repository and explain each section in detail.

On top of the file all necessary packages are imported. Notice how both the `SimpleHttpOperator` as well as the `GithubTagSensor` are part of two different provider packages.

```python
from airflow import DAG
from airflow.models import Variable
from airflow.providers.http.operators.http import SimpleHttpOperator
from airflow.providers.github.sensors.github import GithubTagSensor
from datetime import datetime
```

Next, the DAG context is instantiated using the `DAG` class. The DAG is given the id `my_second_dag` and is set to run every day at 9am starting from the first of September 2022. `catchup` is set to `False` in order to prevent the DAG runs from between the `start_date` and today from being scheduled automatically.

```python
with DAG(
    dag_id="my_second_dag",
    start_date=datetime(2022, 9, 1),
    schedule_interval="0 9 * * *",
    catchup=False
) as dag:
```

:::tip

The `schedule_interval` uses a CRON expression. A good resource to learn about CRON is the [Crontab website](https://crontab.guru/).

:::

> The DAG itself has two tasks, the first one uses the `GithubTagSensor` to wait for a tag with the name `v1.0` to be added to the GitHub repository you specified in the Airflow variable `my_github_repo`. The sensor will check every `30` seconds and time out after a day.

Author: I think that is a good thing to know about early, especially since the default is so high. Added a sentence 🙂

---

> title: "Get started with Apache Airflow - Part 2"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Get started with Airflow, Part 2: Providers, connections, and variables"
```

> sidebar_label: "Get started with Airflow - Part 2"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sidebar_label: "Part 2: Providers, connections, and variables"
```

Reviewer 2: If you accept this change, we should change the sidebar label for part 1 to : "Part 1: Write and run your first DAG"

description: "Learn the core Apache Airflow concepts of using providers and connections."
id: get-started-with-airflow-part-2
---

Learn core Apache Airflow concepts in this hands-on tutorial using the Astro CLI.

> Use this tutorial after completing the [Get started with Apache Airflow](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started) tutorial to learn about how to connect Airflow to external systems.

Author: ```suggestion
Use this tutorial after completing the [Get started with Apache Airflow](https://docs.astronomer.io/tutorials/get-started-with-airflow) tutorial to learn about how to connect Airflow to external systems.
```

After you complete this tutorial, you'll be able to:

- Add a provider to your Airflow environment.
- Create and use an Airflow connection.
- Create and use an Airflow variable.
- Use the `GithubTagSensor` to wait for a tag to be added to a GitHub repository.
- Use the `SimpleHTTPOperator` to query an API.

## Time to complete

This tutorial takes approximately 1 hour to complete.

## Assumed knowledge

To complete this tutorial, you'll need to know:

> - How to write DAGs and run Airflow. See [Get started with Apache Airflow](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started).

Author: ```suggestion
- How to write DAGs and run Airflow. See [Get started with Apache Airflow](https://docs.astronomer.io/tutorials/get-started-with-airflow).
```

- The basics of git. See the [tutorial on Git’s official webpage](https://git-scm.com/docs/gittutorial).

## Prerequisites

- A GitHub account with a personal access token and at least one repository. If you don’t have a GitHub repository you can follow the [steps in the GitHub documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/create-a-repo) on how to create one.

:::info

If you do not have a GitHub account, you can create one for free on the [GitHub website](https://github.com/signup). To create a personal access token, see the [official GitHub documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/creating-a-personal-access-token).

:::

## Step 1: Create your Astro project

> To run data pipelines on Astro, you first need to create an Astro project, which contains the set of files necessary to run Airflow locally. For more information on the Astro project, see Part 1 of the [Get started with Apache Airflow tutorial].

Author: ```suggestion
To run data pipelines on Astro, you first need to create an Astro project, which contains the set of files necessary to run Airflow locally. For more information on the Astro project, see Part 1 of the [Get started with Apache Airflow tutorial](https://docs.astronomer.io/tutorials/get-started-with-airflow).
```

Navigate to the folder of your Astro project from the Get started with Apache Airflow tutorial. 

1. Run the following Astro CLI command to start Airflow:

```bash
astro dev start
```

Once your local environment is ready, the CLI automatically opens a new tab or window in your default web browser to the Airflow UI at `https://localhost:8080`.

2. Log into the Airflow UI with `admin` for both your username and password.

## Step 2: Create your DAG file

> 1. Create a new Python file in the `/dags` folder of your Astro project called `my_second_dag.py`.

Reviewer: I agree, I usually use directory. Will update this.

    ```sh
    astro dev init
    ```

4. Run the following Astro CLI command to start Airflow:

    ```bash
    astro dev start
    ```

    Once your local environment is ready, the CLI automatically opens a new tab or window in your default web browser to the Airflow UI at `https://localhost:8080`.

5. Log in to the Airflow UI with `admin` for both your username and password.

## Step 2: Create your DAG

1. Create a new Python file in the `/dags` directory of your Astro project called `my_second_dag.py`.

> 2. Copy the Getting started with Apache Airflow Part 2 example DAG from the Astronomer Registry.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Copy the [Tutorial DAG: Airflow Connections](https://registry.astronomer.io/dags/get-started-tutorial-2-dag) from the Astronomer Registry.
```

> 2. Copy the [Tutorial DAG: Airflow Connections](https://registry.astronomer.io/dags/get-started-tutorial-2-dag) from the Astronomer Registry.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Copy the code from the **< > Code** tab of the [Tutorial DAG: Airflow Connections](https://registry.astronomer.io/dags/get-started-tutorial-2-dag) from the Astronomer Registry.
```

3. Paste the code into `my_second_dag.py`.

## Step 3: Add a provider package

> 1 Open the Airflow UI to confirm that your DAG was pushed to your environment. On the **DAGs** page, you should see a "DAG Import Error" like the one shown here:

Author: ```suggestion
1. Open the Airflow UI to confirm that your DAG was pushed to your environment. On the **DAGs** page, you should see a "DAG Import Error" like the one shown here:
```

1. Go to **Admin** → **Variables** to open the list of Airflow variables. It will be empty.

![Admin Variables](/img/tutorials/T2_AdminVariables.png)

> 2. Click on the `+` sign to open the form for adding a new variable. Use `my_github_repo` as the **Key** and a GitHub repository you have administrator access to as the **Val**. The repository can be private.

Reviewer: I agree. @TJaniF can you update this next week? I'm not exactly sure what it should be :)

> 2. Click on the `+` sign to open the form for adding a new variable. Use `my_github_repo` as the **Key** and a GitHub repository you have administrator access to as the **Val**. The repository can be private.

Author: ```suggestion
2. Click on the **+** sign to open the form for adding a new variable. Set the **Key** for the variable as `my_github_repo` and set the **Val** as a GitHub repository you have administrator access to. Make sure the **Val** is in the format `github_account_name/repository_name` (for example `apache/airflow`). The repository can be private.
```

Good catch! Yeah I did not make this clear. It is really just the account name and name of the repo with a slash in between. :)

![Add new variable](/img/tutorials/T2_AddNewVariable.png)

3. Save the variable.

4. Refresh the DAGs View. You should now see your DAG without any import errors.

:::note

If you don’t have a GitHub repository you can follow the [steps in the GitHub documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/create-a-repo) on how to create one.

:::

## Step 5: Add a GitHub connection

Connections in Airflow are sets of configurations used to connect with other tools in the data ecosystem. If you are using a hook or operator that connects to an external system, they are most likely doing so using a connection. In our example DAG we use two operators that interact with two different external systems, which means we will need to define two connections.

1. Open the Connections List by clicking on **Admin** → **Connections**.

![Admin Connections](/img/tutorials/T2_AdminConnections.png)

2. Click on the `+` sign to open the form for adding new Airflow connections.

> 3. Name the connection `my_github_connection` and select the **Connection Type** `GitHub`. Note that you can only select connection types that are either available form core Airflow or from a provider package you have installed. If you are missing the connection type `GitHub` double check that you installed the `GitHub` provider correctly (Step 3). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Name the connection `my_github_connection` and select the **Connection Type** `GitHub`. Note that you can only select connection types that are either available form core Airflow or from a provider package you have installed. If you are missing the connection type `GitHub`, double check that you installed the `GitHub` provider correctly (Step 3). 
```

> 4. Enter your **GitHub Access Token**. 

Reviewer: It looks like the screenshots are broken right now, but the Github connection is one where the fields update, so the field is called "GitHub Access Token". I updated to include it, but also feel like it's pretty self-explanatory in this particular case.

5. Test your connection by pressing the `Test` button. You should see a green banner indicating that your connection was successfully tested.
    
![GitHub Connection](/img/tutorials/T2_GitHubConnection.png)
    
6. Save the connection by clicking the `Save` button.

:::info

> The option to test connections was added in Airflow 2.2. If you are running an older version you can skip step 5.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The option to test connections was added in Airflow 2.2. If you are running an older version of Airflow, you can skip step 5.
```

:::

The DAG itself has two tasks, the first one uses the `GithubTagSensor` to wait for a tag with the name `v1.0` to be added to the GitHub repository you specified in the Airflow variable `my_github_repo`. The sensor will check for the tag every `30` seconds and time out after one day. It is best practice to always set a `timeout` because the default value is 7 days, which means the sensor would be waiting for 7 days for the tag to be added to your GitHub repository until it fails.

```python
    tag_sensor = GithubTagSensor(
        task_id='tag_sensor',
        github_conn_id="my_github_connection",
        tag_name='v1.0',
        repository_name=Variable.get("my_github_repo"),
        timeout=60*60*24,
        poke_interval=30
    )
```

The second task uses the `SimpleHttpOperator` to send a `GET` request to the cat fact API. The response is logged to the Airflow task logs (`log_response=True`).

```python
    query_API = SimpleHttpOperator(
        task_id="query_API",
        http_conn_id="my_http_connection",
        method="GET",
        log_response=True
    ) 
```

> Lastly, the dependency between the two tasks is set so that the API is only queried after the `tag_sensor` task has been successful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Lastly, the dependency between the two tasks is set so that the API is only queried after the `tag_sensor` task is successful.
```

```python
    tag_sensor >> query_API
```

> The DAG produces the following **Graph** view:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can see this dependency in the **Graph** view of the Airflow UI:
```
I'm almost inclined to remove this sentence/ screenshot because there's nothing the user can do with this information. It the previous guide it made sense, but we're assuming a basic knowledge of the Airflow UI/ dependencies here. Is this dependency shape something we want to focus on when it's the same as in the previous tutorial?

Reviewer: I could go either way on this one. I tend to include graph view screenshots in most cases because I think it helps reinforce understanding of what the DAG code is doing. And in this case since we're showing the DAG code broken into steps, it gives the user reassurance that they did everything correctly if they get the same graph view. But you're right that we're not using it for any actionable purposes here, so I'm okay removing it if we want to make it more concise.

Author: Yes, I agree. I feel like it is a nice visual "you did it right!" signal but if we need to shorten the tutorial it is the first thing that can go :) 

Actually, I think if we are switching around step 7 and 8 we can loose the screenshot in "View your DAG code" since it was already shown.

![Graph View](/img/tutorials/T2_GraphView.png)

## Step 8: Test your DAG

> 1. Go to the Airflow UI and unpause the DAG by clicking on the toggle to the left of the DAG name. The last scheduled DAG run will automatically start and the `tag_sensor` will start to wait for the `v1.0` tag to be added to your GitHub repository. You will see two light green circles in the **DAGs** View indicating that the DAG run is in progress and the `example_tag_sensor` task is running..

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Go to the Airflow UI and unpause the DAG by clicking on the toggle to the left of the DAG name. The last scheduled DAG run automatically starts, and the `tag_sensor` starts waiting for the `v1.0` tag to be added to your GitHub repository. You will see two light green circles in the **DAGs** view which indicate that the DAG run is in progress and the `example_tag_sensor` task is running.
```

![DAG running](/img/tutorials/T2_GraphView.png)

> 2. Add the tag `v1.0` to your GitHub repository by running the command `git tag v1.0 && git push --tags` from within your local clone of the repository in your terminal. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Add the tag `v1.0` to your GitHub repository by configuring it in the GitHub UI or running `git tag v1.0 && git push --tags` in your local repository clone.
```

>     schedule_interval="0 9 * * *",

Author: ```suggestion
    schedule="0 9 * * *",
```

3. Watch for the `example_tag_sensor` task to finish successfully. The `query_api` task should now start. 

> 4. Check the logs of the `query_api` task for a brand new cat fact!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. In the **Grid** view, click on the green box representing the successful task run for `query_api`. Check the **Log** page of the task for a brand new cat fact!
```

4. Enter your **GitHub Access Token** in the GitHub Access Token field. If you need to create a token, you can follow the [official GitHub documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/creating-a-personal-access-token).
5. Test your connection by clicking **Test**. You should see a green banner indicating that your connection was successfully tested.

    ![GitHub Connection](/img/tutorials/T2_GitHubConnection.png)

    Note that the option to test connections was added in Airflow 2.2. If you are running an older version of Airflow, you can skip this step.

6. Save the connection by clicking the `Save` button.

## Step 6: Create an HTTP connection

1. In the **Connections** view, click **+** to create a new connection.
2. Name the connection `my_http_connection` and select a **Connection Type** of `HTTP`.
3. Enter the host URL for the API you want to query in the **Host** field. For this tutorial we use the Catfact API, which returns a random fact about cats for every `GET` request. The host for this API is `http://catfact.ninja/fact`.
4. Test your connection by pressing the **Test** button.

>     ![HTTP Connection](/img/tutorials/T2_HTTPConnection.png)

Author: ```suggestion
![HTTP Connection](/img/tutorials/T2_HTTPConnection.png)
```

```python
    tag_sensor = GithubTagSensor(
        task_id='tag_sensor',
        github_conn_id="my_github_connection",
        tag_name='v1.0',
        repository_name=Variable.get("my_github_repo"),
        timeout=60*60*24,
        poke_interval=30
    )
```

The second task uses the `SimpleHttpOperator` to send a `GET` request to the cat fact API. The response is logged to the Airflow task logs using `log_response=True`.

```python
    query_API = SimpleHttpOperator(
        task_id="query_API",
        http_conn_id="my_http_connection",
        method="GET",
        log_response=True
    )
```

Lastly, the dependency between the two tasks is set so that the API is only queried after the `tag_sensor` task is successful.

```python
    tag_sensor >> query_API
```

> You can see this dependency in the **Graph** view of the Airflow UI:
> 
> ![Graph View](/img/tutorials/T2_GraphView.png)
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

## Time to complete

This tutorial takes approximately 1 hour to complete.

## Assumed knowledge

To complete this tutorial, you'll need to know:

- How to write DAGs and run Airflow. See [Get started with Apache Airflow](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/get-started).
- Basic knowledge of git. See the [tutorial on Git’s official webpage](https://git-scm.com/docs/gittutorial).

## Prerequisites

- An Astro project created with the [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/configure-cli).
- A GitHub account with a personal access token and at least one repository. If you don’t have a GitHub repository you can follow the [steps in the GitHub documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/create-a-repo) on how to create one.

:::info

If you do not have a GitHub account you can create one for free following the steps on the [GitHub website](https://github.com/signup) . You can learn how to create a personal access token in the [official GitHub documentation](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/creating-a-personal-access-token).

:::

## Step 1: Start your Astro project

> To run data pipelines on Astro, you first need to create an Astro project, which contains the set of files necessary to run Airflow locally. For more information on the Astro project, see Part 1 of the [Get started with Apache Airflow tutorial]().

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run data pipelines on Astro, you first need to create an Astro project, which contains the set of files necessary to run Airflow locally. For more information on the Astro project, see Part 1 of the [Get started with Apache Airflow tutorial].
```

5. Test your connection by clicking **Test**. You should see a green banner indicating that your connection was successfully tested.
    
    ![GitHub Connection](/img/tutorials/T2_GitHubConnection.png)

    Note that the option to test connections was added in Airflow 2.2. If you are running an older version of Airflow, you can skip this step.
    
6. Save the connection by clicking the `Save` button.

## Step 6: Create an HTTP connection

1. In the **Connections** view, click **+** to create a new connection.
2. Name the connection `my_http_connection` and select a **Connection Type** of `HTTP`.
3. Enter the host URL for the API you want to query in the **Host** field. For this tutorial we use the Catfact API, which returns a random fact about cats for every `GET` request. The host for this API is `http://catfact.ninja/fact`.
4. Test your connection by pressing the **Test** button.

    ![HTTP Connection](/img/tutorials/T2_HTTPConnection.png)

5. Click **Save**.

You should now have two connections as shown in the following screenshot:

![Connection List](/img/tutorials/T2_TwoConnections.png)

## Step 7: View your DAG code

> Now that your Airflow environment is configured correctly, look at DAG code you copied from the repository to see how your new configurations are used at the code level.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that your Airflow environment is configured correctly, look at the DAG code you copied from the repository to see how your new configurations are used at the code level.
```

At the top of the file, all necessary packages are imported. Notice how both the `SimpleHttpOperator` as well as the `GithubTagSensor` are part of the provider packages you installed.

```python
from airflow import DAG
from airflow.models import Variable
from airflow.providers.http.operators.http import SimpleHttpOperator
from airflow.providers.github.sensors.github import GithubTagSensor
from datetime import datetime
```

> Next, the DAG context is instantiated using the `DAG` class. The DAG has the ID `my_second_dag`, and it starts its runs on September 1st, 2022. After its start date, the DAG runs every day at 9:00 AM as defined in a [cron](https://crontab.guru/) statement. `catchup` is set to `False` in order to prevent the DAG runs from between the `start_date` and today from being scheduled automatically.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, the DAG context is instantiated using the `DAG` class. The DAG has the ID `my_second_dag`, and it starts running on September 1st, 2022. After its start date, the DAG runs every day at 9:00 AM as defined in a [cron](https://crontab.guru/) statement. `catchup` is set to `False` in order to prevent the DAG runs from between the `start_date` and today from being scheduled automatically.
```

```python
with DAG(
    dag_id="my_second_dag",
    start_date=datetime(2022, 9, 1),
    schedule_interval="0 9 * * *",
    catchup=False
) as dag:
```

> The DAG itself has two tasks. The first task uses the `GithubTagSensor` to check whether a tag named `v1.0` has been to your GitHub repository. It uses the Airflow variable (`my_github_repo`) and connection (`my_github_connection`) to access the correct repository with the appropriate credentials. The sensor checks for the tag every 30 seconds and will time out after one day. It is best practice to always set a `timeout` because the default value is 7 days, which is a long default value that can impact performance.

Author: ```suggestion
The DAG itself has two tasks. The first task uses the `GithubTagSensor` to check whether a tag named `v1.0` has been to your GitHub repository. It utilizes the Airflow variable (`my_github_repo`) and connection (`my_github_connection`) to access the correct repository with the appropriate credentials. The sensor checks for the tag every 30 seconds and will time out after one day. It is best practice to always set a `timeout` because the default value is quite long at 7 days, which can impact performance if left unchanged in DAG that run on a higher frequency.
```

I didn't like the flow of double "use", open to other synonyms ofc 😅
